Kafka Interview Preparation
What is Apache Kafka?
Apache Kafka is a distributed, fault-tolerant, and high-throughput messaging system
based on the publish-subscribe model. It was originally developed at LinkedIn and open-
sourced in 2011.
• Send and receive real-time data
• → Like a chat app, where one service sends a message and others instantly get it.
• Store data safely
→ If a service is offline, Kafka saves the data until the service comes back and reads it.
• Process data as it flows
→ Kafka can also analyze data as it moves, using something called the Kafka Streams API.
Example:
Imagine you are getting live order data from an online store:
o Without Kafka Streams: You just collect and store all the orders.
o With Kafka Streams: You can count orders, find totals, or detect fraud —
while the data is still coming in.
So, Kafka Streams helps you do smart things with data in real time, without needing to
store and analyze it later.
Kafka Advantages
• Loose Coupling: Services communicate without needing to know about each other.
• Durability: Messages are stored on disk and can be replayed even if the consumer
is down.
• Scalability: Easily handles large volumes of data and can scale horizontally.
• Flexibility: New consumers can be added without modifying the producers.

-- 1 of 13 --

Explain Horizontal scaling and vertical scaling?
Horizontal Scaling (Scale Out)
• Add more machines to handle more load.
• Each machine (or server) handles part of the work.
• Common in distributed systems like Kafka.
Example:
You have 1 Kafka broker. If traffic increases, you add 2 more brokers — now 3 Kafka servers
share the load.
Pros: More flexible, fault-tolerant, and easy to scale.
Cons: Slightly complex to manage.
Vertical Scaling (Scale Up)
• Add more power (CPU, RAM, storage) to your existing machine.
• You're making a single server stronger.
Example:
You upgrade your Kafka server from 8 GB RAM to 32 GB RAM to handle more messages.
Pros: Simpler setup.
Cons: There's a limit to how much you can upgrade one machine, and if it fails —
everything fails.
Kafka uses Horizontal Scaling - Because it can run on multiple servers (called
brokers) and share the data among them.
Step by step Kafka Flow:
Step-by-step Flow:
1. Producer creates and sends events.

-- 2 of 13 --

2. Kafka producer batches the events (internally).
3. These batches are sent directly to Kafka brokers.
4. The broker receives and stores them in the topic partition on disk.
5. Consumers later pull from these topic partitions.
Example Flow (RabbitMQ):
Producer sends message → Broker queues it.

-- 3 of 13 --

1. Broker delivers the message to a consumer.
2. Consumer processes it and sends back an acknowledgment (ACK).
3. Broker removes the message from the queue.
If no ACK is received, broker will:
• Assume failure (e.g., consumer crashed).
• Redeliver the message to another consumer.
This process is called message tracking or delivery state management.
Differences between ActiveMQ/RabbitMQ and kafka?
Feature Active MQ/Rabbit MQ kafka
Type Message Broker (traditional) Distributed Event Streaming Platform
Message
Delivery
Push-based — Broker sends
(pushes) messages to
consumers.
Pull-based — Consumers fetch (pull)
messages when they’re ready.
Throughput Lower Throughput — Each
message needs
acknowledgment, message state
is tracked.
High Throughput — Producers don’t
wait for acknowledgments. Messages
are written fast in batches.
Message
Storage
Short-term — Once consumed,
the message is deleted.
Long-term — Messages are stored for
a defined time, even after being read.
Message
Replay
Not possible — Once a message
is consumed, it’s gone.
Possible — Consumers can re-read
old messages using offsets.
Ordering Maintains order within a queue. Maintains order within a partition.
Scaling Limited Horizontal Scaling —
Difficult to scale across nodes.
Easy Horizontal Scaling — Add more
brokers and partitions.

-- 4 of 13 --

Delivery
Guarantees
Supports at-most-once, at-least-
once, exactly-once (with plugins).
Supports at-least-once and exactly-
once (with config).
Latency Low latency for small workloads Slightly higher latency, but optimized
for throughput.
Stream
Processing
Not supported natively. Built-in Kafka Streams API for real-
time processing.
Use Cases Ideal for traditional messaging:
commands, notifications, tasks
.Ideal for data pipelines, analytics, log
aggregation, and real-time apps.
message state is tracked means →
The broker keeps track of the message state:
• Has it been delivered?
• Has it been acknowledged (successfully processed)?
• Should it be redelivered if no ACK is received?
Consumers can re-read old messages using offsets. →
In Kafka, every message in a partition is stored with a unique offset — a number that tells
the position of the message.
Kafka UI:
Kafka UI is a web-based tool that helps you interact with Kafka visually. (like we will
open https:localhost:8080 in browser right.. that only kafka UI)
Instead of using command-line tools, Kafka UI lets you see and manage Kafka data easily
from your browser.
Kafka UI Lets You:
1. See all topic names in the Kafka cluster
2. Check how many partitions each topic has
3. View replication factor (how many copies per partition)

-- 5 of 13 --

4. See how many messages are in each topic
5. Send (produce) messages to any topic manually
6. Read (consume) messages from a topic
7. Test message flow without writing code → Kafka UI allows you to send and read
messages directly from your browser —
without needing to write Java, Python, or CLI scripts.
8. View all consumer groups
9. Track offsets (how far each group has read) → If a partition has 100 messages
(offsets 0 to 99), and a consumer group has read up to offset 79, then:
The group’s offset = 79
It has read 80 messages
10. Check consumer lag (how behind the group is) → Lag means the difference between
the latest message in Kafka and the consumer’s current offset.
✅ Example:
a. Latest message in topic = offset 99
b. Group has read up to = offset 79
c. Lag = 99 - 79 = 20
So the consumer is 20 messages behind. That’s the consumer lag.
11. Monitor group activity/status
12. See all Kafka brokers and their status (online/offline)
13. Create new topics
14. Delete topics
15. Edit topic settings (like partitions, retention time) → Retention Time
a. This defines how long Kafka should keep messages before deleting them.
Why Use Kafka UI?
• Easy to use — no command-line needed
• Helps developers test Kafka features
• Useful for debugging and monitoring
• Saves time during development and support

-- 6 of 13 --

What is a Kafka Topic?
A Kafka topic is like a container where messages (also called events) are stored.
• Producers send (write) messages into the topic.
• Consumers read messages from the topic.
• You can have many producers and many consumers for a single topic — this is
called multi-producer, multi-consumer.
Important point:
In most traditional systems, once a message is read, it's deleted.
But in Kafka, messages are not deleted after being read.
Instead, Kafka keeps them for a specific amount of time (like 7 days or more) — this is
called retention.
Think of it like this:
Topic = Folder
Message = File inside the folder
What are Partitions?
Kafka divides a topic into smaller parts called partitions.
• Each partition stores messages in the order they arrive.
• Once a message is added to a partition, it can’t be changed.
• Every message inside a partition has a unique number called an offset (used to
identify the message).
Why use partitions?
• So that multiple consumers can read from the same topic at the same time.
• This improves speed and performance.
Example:

-- 7 of 13 --

If a topic has 3 partitions, then 3 consumers can read from it in parallel.
What is Replication?
Kafka makes copies of each partition to make the system more reliable. These copies are
called replicas.
• Replication is done at the partition level.
• One of the replicas is the leader → it handles all reads and writes.
• The other replicas are followers → they copy data from the leader.
If the leader fails, one of the followers will automatically take over as the new leader.
This keeps the system running without data loss.
Leader and Follower Behavior ?
• Each partition has one broker acting as the leader.
• The other brokers for that partition are followers.
• The leader handles all client requests (reading or writing messages).
• Followers replicate (copy) the leader’s data to stay in sync.
If the leader fails, Kafka automatically promotes a follower to become the new
leader, ensuring no interruption in service.
How a Producer Sends a Message
1. The producer sends a message to a topic.
2. Kafka routes it to the leader of a partition within that topic.
3. The leader:
a. Appends the message to the partition.
b. Assigns it a unique offset.
c. Increments the offset for the next message.
In Simple Terms
• Topic = a folder to hold messages.

-- 8 of 13 --

• Partitions = split the topic into parts for better performance.
• Offsets = unique ID for each message in a partition.
• Replication = backup copies of partitions to prevent data loss
• Leader = handles all writes/reads.
• Followers = sync data from leader.
• Producers send to the leader, and the leader stores the message with an offset.
Will all replicas be on different brokers?
Yes — ideally, Kafka tries to place each replica on a different broker.
This is done to ensure high availability.
• If one broker goes down, another broker still has the data.
• This is why a replication factor must be less than or equal to the number of
brokers.
How Does the Producer Choose the Partition?
When a producer sends a message to a Kafka topic, it decides which partition the
message should go to using one of the following methods:
1. Manual Partitioning
You explicitly specify the partition number:
javaCopyEditnew ProducerRecord<>("topic", 2, "key", "value");
• The message is sent directly to partition 2.
• Kafka does not interfere.
2. Key-based Partitioning
You provide a key, but not a partition:
javaCopyEditnew ProducerRecord<>("topic", "user123", "value");
• The producer uses:

-- 9 of 13 --

iniCopyEditpartition = hash(key) % total_partitions
• All messages with the same key (e.g., "user123") go to the same partition.
• Ensures order is preserved for that key.
3. Round-Robin Partitioning (No Key)
You don’t provide a key or partition:
javaCopyEditnew ProducerRecord<>("topic", "value");
• The producer distributes messages in a round-robin fashion.
• Ensures load is balanced across all partitions.
iniCopyEditpartition = hash(key) % total_partitions → here total partitions
value how we will get ?
When the producer sends a message:
• It automatically contacts the Kafka cluster
• Gets the metadata of the topic
o This includes how many partitions the topic has
So, you don’t need to manually set total_partitions in your code.
The Kafka producer client fetches it from the broker.
Consumers?
• A Kafka consumer is an application that reads messages from a Kafka topic. Just
like how a producer sends data, a consumer receives it.
• When a topic has multiple partitions, a consumer can read from one or more of
those partitions. But in most cases, consumers work together in a consumer
group. → Each consumer in the group takes care of some partitions, so they share
the work and process messages faster and more efficiently.
• A consumer group is a set of consumers that share the work of reading messages
from a topic. Within a group, each partition is read by only one consumer at a
time. This ensures that no message is read twice within the same group. However, if
there are more partitions than consumers, some consumers may handle multiple

-- 10 of 13 --

partitions. If there are more consumers than partitions, some consumers will be
idle.
• Every message in a partition has a unique number called an offset. The consumer
keeps track of the offset to know which messages it has already read. This way, it
avoids processing the same message again. Kafka can auto-commit this offset or
let the developer commit it manually.
• Kafka does not send messages to consumers automatically.
Instead, consumers ask (poll) Kafka regularly to check if there are new messages.
This is called pull-based communication.
• You can have many consumer groups reading from the same topic, and each
group will get all the messages.
So if you have two different services (like billing and notification), both can read the same
topic independently, using their own group IDs.
• Each message in Kafka has a unique offset (like a line number).
Consumers keep track of the last offset they read, so they don’t read the same message
again.
Kafka can auto-save this or let you save it manually.
Broker
A broker is a Kafka server.
Kafka runs as a cluster of brokers — usually 3 or more.
Each broker:
• Stores topic data (partitions)
• Handles read/write requests from producers and consumers
• Coordinates with other brokers in the cluster
Example:
If you have 3 brokers: Broker 1, Broker 2, Broker 3 — Kafka will spread partitions and
replicas across these brokers.

-- 11 of 13 --

Partition
A partition is a part (or slice) of a Kafka topic.
Messages inside a partition are:
• Stored in order
• Identified by a unique number called an offset
A topic can have one or many partitions.
Example:
If a topic has 3 partitions, Kafka will split messages across Partition 0, Partition 1, and
Partition 2.
What is ZooKeeper?
ZooKeeper is a coordination service used by Kafka (in older versions) to manage and
monitor the Kafka cluster.
Think of ZooKeeper like a manager who keeps track of:
• Which Kafka brokers are alive
• Who is the leader of each partition
• Helps in electing a new leader if one broker goes down
What Does ZooKeeper Do in Kafka?
1. Keeps track of all brokers in the cluster
(e.g., Broker 1, Broker 2, etc.)
2. Manages leader election
For each partition, there is one leader broker.
If the leader fails, ZooKeeper helps pick a new leader from the followers.
3. Stores metadata

-- 12 of 13 --

Like topic names, partition counts, replica info, etc.
4. Helps Kafka maintain cluster health

-- 13 of 13 --

